Here I collect a couple results that rule out certain universality
classes of phase transitions between symmetry-protected topological
(SPT) phases and trivial phases in spin chains. I hope to answer the
following question:

> In spin chains, are there any SPT-trivial phase boundaries that are
> described by conformal field theories that are unitary minimal models
> with a central charge *c* &lt; 1?

To be explicit, I would like to exclude tricritical points or other
fine-tunings. As we’ll see below, the answer is in fact no.

### Motivation

My motivation for this question comes mostly from noticing a small
pattern in a couple ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub> protected phases – a)
the Haldane phase connected to the AKLT model and b) perturbed cluster
states on a chain. I noticed that the trivial-SPT phase transition was
seemingly always *c* = 1, and whenever there were transitions with
smaller central charge in the phase diagram, they were necessarily
involving a symmetry-broken phase. The
ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub>-symmetric Ashkin-Teller model also has
*c* = 1, so it seemed to me that *c* = 1 was likely a symptom of the
ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub> symmetry. It was then tempting that
SPT-trivial transitions for SPTs protected by
ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub> might generically have *c* = 1 – I wasn’t
sure how the symmetry was constraining the central charge, and whether
this might generalize for SPTs protected by different symmetry groups,
like ℤ<sub>3</sub> × ℤ<sub>3</sub>. Below I give examples of a couple
papers showing the *c* = 1 transitions in these
ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub>-symmetric models.

The Haldane phase is a phase of gapped spin-1 antiferromagnets protected
by ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub> (among other symmetries). On the
addition of an anisotropy (local (*S*<sup>*z*</sup>)<sup>2</sup>), the
Haldane phase suffers a phase transition into a trivial phase without
topological order and without symmetry breaking. An example phase
diagram is given in this paper by [Ejima, Lange, and
Fehske](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.06649) for the spin-1 chain
*H* = ∑<sub>*i*</sub>*J*(*S*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*x*</sup>*S*<sub>*i* + 1</sub><sup>*x*</sup>+*S*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*y*</sup>*S*<sub>*i* + 1</sub><sup>*y*</sup>+*Δ**S*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*z*</sup>*S*<sub>*i* + 1</sub><sup>*z*</sup>) + *D*(*S*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*z*</sup>)<sup>2</sup>:

[![Phase diagram showing c=1 transition between Haldane and large-D
phase](https://i.stack.imgur.com/A36zMm.png)](https://i.stack.imgur.com/A36zMm.png)

Note that the phase transition between the Haldane phase and the large-D
phase is described by a conformal field theory with *c* = 1. There is a
*c* = 1/2 phase transition out of the Haldane phase into a different
antiferromagnetic phase, but the latter phase has ℤ<sub>2</sub>
symmetry-breaking, so it’s not an example of a topological to trivial
phase transition.

Similarly, taking linear combinations of the
ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub>-protected cluster state Hamiltonian
*H*<sub>SPT</sub> =  − ∑<sub>*i*</sub>*σ*<sub>*i* − 1</sub><sup>*z*</sup>*σ*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*x*</sup>*σ*<sub>*i* + 1</sub><sup>*z*</sup>
with a trivial paramagnet
*H*<sub>0</sub> =  − ∑<sub>*i*</sub>*σ*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*x*</sup> and
Ising
*H*<sub>Ising</sub> =  − ∑<sub>*i*</sub>(−1)<sup>*i*</sup>*σ*<sub>*i*</sub><sup>*z*</sup>*σ*<sub>*i* + 1</sub><sup>*z*</sup>
gives rise to the following phase diagram [![ZXZ+X phase
diagram](https://i.stack.imgur.com/rHpJcm.png)](https://i.stack.imgur.com/rHpJcm.png)

featuring a *c* = 1 direct transition between the trivial and SPT
phases. Again, there’s lines of *c* = 1/2 phase transitions, but those
are not between the trivial and SPT phases. This figure came from a
paper by [Tantivasadakarn, Thorngren, Vishwanath, and
Verresen](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07599) which investigated a few
other phase diagrams coming from interpolating between SPT, trivial, and
pivot Hamiltonians, the last of which generates a unitary transformation
between the SPT and trivial fixed points.

(As an aside, one usually discusses the ℤ<sub>2</sub> × ℤ<sub>2</sub>
symmetry of the cluster state generated by *σ*<sup>*x*</sup> on the even
and odd sublattices. That symmetry holds if we keep to the bottom-most
horizontal line of the phase diagram. We only preserve the product of
*σ*<sup>*x*</sup> on all sites on adding the Ising Hamiltonian, and then
the SPT is protected by a combination of that symmetry and a version of
time-reversal symmetry.)

### An argument for *c* ≥ 1

The answer to the question posed at top is that CFT-described direct
transitions between bosonic SPT phases in (1+1)*d* indeed suffer
*c* ≥ 1. This result is motivated and explained in a paper by [Tsui,
Huang, Jiang, and Lee](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00834.pdf). Note that
this result is more general than my question – I was concerned with
SPT-trivial transitions, and their result also appears to hold for
transitions from nontrivial SPT phase to different nontrivial SPT phases
protected by the same symmetry.

Here is how I interpret the main argument in section 10 of the above
paper. Any conformal field theory at the transition must be invariant
under the shared symmetries of the two abutting phases. However, unitary
minimal models can only have either global on-site ℤ<sub>2</sub> or
*S*<sub>3</sub> symmetry. The symmetry groups protecting SPTs in spin
chains are necessarily different than just ℤ<sub>2</sub> or
*S*<sub>3</sub>, so the CFTs at the transition can’t be unitary minimal
models.

The claim that unitary minimal models have relatively restricted global
on-site symmetries (ℤ<sub>2</sub> or *S*<sub>3</sub>) is argued in a
paper by [Ruelle and Verhoeven](https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9803129).

### Thoughts on the argument

I’m not sure that I fully understand the argument. Does this mean that
the mere presence of extra discrete global on-site symmetries in a
lattice model is enough to rule out a transition being described by a
unitary minimal model? This interpretation of the above argument would
be quite surprising to me. In a model with ℤ<sub>2</sub> × *G* symmetry,
where *G* could be for instance some gigantic group, I feel that a phase
transition that broke just this ℤ<sub>2</sub> subgroup would stay in the
Ising universality class despite the presence of the unbroken *G*.

It’s tempting that one could indeed construct such a counterexample by
adding trivial degrees of freedom on each site of the Ising model to
enhance the symmetry group from ℤ<sub>2</sub> to ℤ<sub>2</sub> × *G*. On
the other hand, maybe such a trivial counterexample would be explicitly
ruled out with reasonable hypotheses (for example, such a model with
only Ising-type interactions between the original degrees of freedom
would be rather fine-tuned, given that there could be many local
symmetry-consistent interactions once the additional degrees of freedom
were added).
